Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous
Systems
The Verification Independence Axiom, Asymmetric Authority Gradients, and Non-Parametric
Distillation in the BIZRA Protocol
Node0
BIZRA Project, Independent Research
node0@bizra.org
ABSTRACT
Current autonomous agent architectures exhibit a fundamental flaw
we call Causal Entanglement: the generative process 𝑃gen (the pol-
icy / LLM) and the verification process 𝑃ver (the reward model,
judge, or self-reflection loop) share weights, context windows, and
training history. As a consequence, the verification signal carries
non-zero mutual information 𝐼 (𝐻gen; 𝐻ver) > 0 with the genera-
tion process, and the system is architecturally required to grade
its own homework. We argue that the chronic failure modes of au-
tonomous agents — hallucination, reward hacking, indirect prompt
injection, and context exhaustion — are not capability gaps; they
are violations of a single architectural invariant we formalize as
the Verification Independence Axiom (VIA): any signal used to up-
date system state, weights, or authority must originate from a pro-
cess causally disjoint from the process being evaluated. We intro-
duce the BIZRA Protocol, the first agent architecture that enforces
VIA structurally rather than heuristically. BIZRA derives three ar-
chitectural corollaries from VIA: (i) a strict PAT/SAT airgap im-
plementing an Asymmetric Authority Gradient (Ring-3 proposer,
Ring-0 verifier); (ii) an Outside-In Sandbox enforcing the Isnād/Matn
Isolation Protocol, under which the untrusted payload 𝜇 never en-
ters the proposer’s context window 𝐶𝑡 ; and (iii) a Proof-of-Impact
(PoI) ledger binding reward to disjoint verification of external state
mutation. We prove three conditional security theorems: tamper-
evidence of the receipt chain (unconditional, under cryptographic
assumptions), non-bypassability of the FATE constitutional gate
(conditional on a runtime construction invariant), and reduction
of indirect prompt injection to an explicit, testable invariant vio-
lation (conditional on the Matn/PAT isolation invariant and sand-
box deployment). We further specify Non-Parametric Distillation
via Modular Skill Files as a structural alternative to gradient-based
continual learning, and prove that PoI is sound against Sybil and
collusion attacks under stated assumptions. A preliminary single-
node implementation reports sub-millisecond FATE-gate evalua-
tion, 𝑂 (1) amortized receipt verification, and end-to-end proto-
col overhead below 4% of agent inference time. We are explicit
throughout about the boundary between current evidence (single-
node, cryptographic), design (architectural specifications not yet
implemented at multi-node scale), and direction (federation stages
not yet executed). The contribution is not a claim that BIZRA elim-
inates agent failure modes, but that it reduces them to violations
of explicit, testable architectural invariants — a stronger epistemo-
logical position than heuristic defense.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Ubiquitous computing; •
Security and privacy → Distributed systems security; Cryp-
tographic protocols; • Computing methodologies → Distributed
artificial intelligence.
KEYWORDS
Verification independence, causal entanglement, autonomous agents,
prompt injection, reward hacking, cryptographic receipts, non-parametric
memory, constitutional AI, Islamic finance
1 INTRODUCTION: CAUSAL
ENTANGLEMENT IN AUTONOMOUS
AGENTS
Current autonomous agent architectures exhibit systemic, predictable
failure modes: hallucination of API calls, infinite retry loops on bro-
ken code, susceptibility to indirect prompt injection, and inability
to retain learned behaviors without catastrophic forgetting. These
symptoms are widely observed and are commonly misattributed to
scaling deficits or insufficient prompt engineering. We argue that
they are symptoms of a deeper structural flaw we call Causal En-
tanglement.
In standard reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
or LLM-as-a-judge paradigms, the policy network 𝜋𝜃 and the ver-
ifier network 𝑉𝜙 share an architectural lineage and training distri-
bution. When an agent evaluates its own output, the verification
signal is not independent of the generation process: the verifier
shares the same training corpus, the same architectural blind spots,
and — in the limit of self-reflection prompts — the same weights
as the generator. This creates a solipsistic feedback loop in which
the system is effectively grading its own homework. Recent work
on the verification horizon [1] demonstrates empirically that the
classical intuition “verification is easier than generation” inverts
as models grow more capable: verifying whether a proposed patch
actually fixes a bug is no longer obviously easier than writing the
patch. The verifier, sharing the generator’s blind spots, fails in cor-
related ways.
This is the structural reason RL on agentic tasks stalls. It is not
context length, and it is not sandbox escapes. It is the absence of a
source of truth that is causally outside the model’s own influence.

-- 1 of 12 --

Node0
1.1 Thesis and Contribution
We introduce the Verification Independence Axiom (VIA) as the load-
bearing architectural invariant of reliable autonomous agency, and
we present the BIZRA Protocol as the first architecture that en-
forces VIA structurally rather than heuristically. The BIZRA Pro-
tocol derives its specific mechanisms as strict corollaries of this
single axiom; it does not assemble independent mechanisms.
Thesis
Autonomous agents fail not due to a lack of reasoning capabil-
ity, but due to systemic epistemology failures. Current agent
architectures violate the Verification Independence Axiom: ev-
ery checking mechanism shares a causal history with the thing
being checked. The BIZRA Protocol makes verification inde-
pendent by architecture, reducing the major failure modes —
hallucination, reward hacking, prompt injection, context ex-
haustion — to violations of explicit, testable architectural in-
variants.
This paper makes five contributions:
(1) The Verification Independence Axiom (§3). We formalize
VIA as an information-theoretic requirement: 𝐼 (𝐻gen; 𝐻ver) →
0, where 𝐻 is the causal history (weights, training data, in-
termediate activations) of the generation and verification pro-
cesses. We position VIA relative to the literature on generator-
verifier asymmetry [1, 30].
(2) The BIZRA Protocol architecture (§4). We specify BIZRA’s
seven-component node architecture, including the Asymmet-
ric Authority Gradient (Ring-3 PAT proposer, Ring-0 SAT/FATE
verifier) that operationalizes VIA at the OS level, and the FATE
constitutional boundary gate.
(3) The Isnād/Matn Isolation Protocol (§5). We formalize the
architectural invariant 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 ∀𝑡: untrusted external data never
enters the proposer’s context window. We specify the Outside-
In Sandbox that generates the deterministic Isnād 𝜄 consumed
by the PAT.
(4) Conditional security theorems (§6). We prove: (a) tamper-
evidence of the receipt chain (unconditional, under cryptographic
assumptions); (b) non-bypassability of FATE (conditional on a
runtime construction invariant); (c) reduction of indirect prompt
injection to invariant violation (conditional on 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 and sand-
box deployment); (d) PoI soundness against Sybil and collusion
(conditional on 𝑘 ≥ 2 honest attestation).
(5) Non-Parametric Distillation (§7). We reframe PoI as Non-
Parametric Distillation: BIZRA learns by minting receipts (information-
preserving) rather than by mutating weights (entropy-positive).
We specify Modular Skill Files as the unit of learning and con-
trast with parametric fine-tuning.
1.2 Position, Scope, and Honesty
This is a position, architecture, and security-analysis paper, not
a multi-node deployment study. BIZRA’s current implementation
status is at the Seed stage — a single-node runtime with federation
to additional nodes planned but not yet executed. We distinguish
three epistemic categories throughout:
• Current state (proven). Node0 operates. The receipt chain is
initialized. The Third Fact Protocol is implemented. Single-node
measurements hold.
• Design (specified, not yet proven at scale). The seven-component
architecture, the Asymmetric Authority Gradient, the Isnād/Matn
Isolation Protocol, FATE, PoI, and Skill Files are specified and
(where applicable) implemented at single-node scale, but not
yet demonstrated at multi-node scale or under adversary sim-
ulation.
• Direction (aspirational). Tree and Forest federation stages, the
universal network URP, and globally significant adoption are di-
rection only.
This discipline is the paper’s methodological contribution. We
do not claim that BIZRA eliminates agent failure modes; we claim
that it reduces them to violations of explicit, testable architectural
invariants. The distinction matters: “eliminates” is an unbounded
assertion, “reduces to invariant violation” is a falsifiable claim with
a defined proof burden.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
BIZRA sits at the intersection of five research streams: (i) generator-
verifier asymmetry, (ii) sandboxed agent execution, (iii) verifiable
computation and cryptographic proof systems, (iv) modular / non-
parametric memory for continual learning, and (v) constitutional
and ethical AI governance. We situate BIZRA within each and iden-
tify the gap it addresses.
2.1 Generator-Verifier Asymmetry
Recent empirical work [1] demonstrates that the classical “verifi-
cation is easier than generation” intuition — which underwrites
RLHF, RLVR, and most LLM-as-a-judge pipelines — inverts as gen-
erators grow more capable. Verifying whether a coding-agent’s
patch fixes a bug requires understanding the bug, which approaches
the difficulty of writing the patch. This empirical finding aligns
with the theoretical observation that any verifier sharing training
data and weights with the generator inherits correlated blind spots.
The reward-hacking benchmark of [2] quantifies this vulnerability
empirically across tool-using RL agents. BIZRA’s contribution is to
formalize the underlying failure as a violation of VIA and to spec-
ify an architecture in which the verifier is causally disjoint from
the generator by construction, not by training procedure.
2.2 Sandboxed Agent Execution and Isolation
Sandboxing untrusted code in isolated namespaces is a well-established
OS-level technique. Browser-agent security work [9, 10] increas-
ingly frames defense against prompt injection as a problem of se-
mantic virtualization — isolating untrusted external data from priv-
ileged execution — rather than as a problem of prompt-level filter-
ing. ARGUS [11] and AgentSentry [12] explicitly reject heuristic
detection in favor of causal or context-purification mechanisms.
The threat-modeling survey of [13] places MCP, A2A, Agora, and
ANP each as having distinct exposure surfaces requiring protocol-
specific mitigations. BIZRA’s Outside-In Sandbox (§5) extends this
line by enforcing 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 as an architectural invariant: the LLM

-- 2 of 12 --

Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous Systems
never reads the untrusted payload; it reads only a deterministic
summary produced by a disjoint process.
The intellectual lineage of this idea traces to Telescript [15], Gen-
eral Magic’s mobile-agent language of the early 1990s, in which
the “place” (server-side execution environment) enforced permis-
sions on visiting agent code independent of what the agent’s code
claimed to need. BIZRA’s contribution is a cryptographically-hardened
revival of the mobile-agent paradigm, using modern primitives (Linux
namespaces instead of a bytecode VM sandbox) and adding the
economic-incentive alignment that Telescript lacked (the PoI ledger,
§7).
2.3 Verifiable Computation and Cryptographic
Proof Systems
Tamper-evident log structures [27, 28] and authenticated data struc-
tures [29] provide the technical substrate for BIZRA’s Receipt layer.
Zero-knowledge proof systems [30, 31] extend this to enable verifi-
cation without disclosure, a property relevant to BIZRA’s privacy-
preserving receipt design. Accountable computing [35] and verifi-
able computation [36, 37] provide formal models for proving that a
computation was executed correctly. Consensus mechanisms [32,
33] demonstrate feasibility of distributed agreement without cen-
tral authority, but illustrate a recurring failure mode: the consen-
sus mechanism becomes decoupled from substantive value produc-
tion [34? ]. BIZRA’s PoI is a deliberate alternative: reward follows
verified useful contribution, not participation in a coordination
game.
2.4 Modular and Non-Parametric Memory
The position paper [4] argues that foundation models are “funda-
mentally” limited in their ability to accumulate experience over de-
ployment lifetimes, and that modular memory is the key architec-
tural commitment for continual learning agents. Context-folding [5]
lets agents actively fold and discard working context on long-horizon
tasks; MemRL [6] indexes experience rather than keeping it resi-
dent in-context; Agent-Omit [7] treats omission as a learned, adap-
tive decision. BIZRA’s Skill Files (§7) extend this line: the unit of
learning is a 200-token distilled trajectory stored in the SAT’s Cold
Archive and loaded into the PAT’s L1 Cache on demand. Because
the memory lives in a causally disjoint external graph, it cannot
overwrite or degrade the base model’s foundational reasoning ca-
pabilities — a structural counter to catastrophic forgetting.
2.5 Constitutional and Ethical AI
Constitutional AI [26] encodes normative constraints into model
training and deployment. Sovereign-AI frameworks [42, 43] em-
phasize the right of communities to govern AI systems that affect
them, though mostly at nation-state level. The fairness, account-
ability, and transparency literature [44, 45] documents harms of
opaque algorithmic systems. BIZRA treats sovereignty as a prop-
erty of the individual node, not of the state or platform; FATE (§4)
is a non-bypassable architectural gate, not a policy commitment.
Islamic finance provides a mature, formally articulated corpus of
constraints on economic extraction [38–41]; BIZRA operational-
izes these at the architectural level (§7).
3 THE VERIFICATION INDEPENDENCE
AXIOM
Reliable computation requires that state mutations be validated
against a ground truth that exists outside the causal cone of the
process initiating the mutation. We formalize this as VIA.
3.1 Definition
Axiom 3.1 (Verification Independence). Let 𝑃gen be the generative
process proposing a state transition, and 𝑃ver be the process eval-
uating the success of said transition. For a system to be epistemo-
logically sound, 𝑃ver must be causally disjoint from 𝑃gen across the
probability space of state-action pairs:
𝑃ver (𝑆𝑡+1 | 𝑆𝑡 , 𝑎) ⊥ 𝑃gen (𝑎 | 𝑆𝑡 )
where 𝑆𝑡 is the environment state and 𝑎 is the proposed action.
Equivalently, in information-theoretic terms, any signal used to
update system state, weights, or authority must originate from a
process that shares zero mutual information 𝐼 (𝐻gen; 𝐻ver) → 0 re-
garding the causal history 𝐻 (weights, training data, intermediate
activations) of the evaluation.
Definition 3.2 (Causal Entanglement). A system is causally en-
tangled if it violates VIA: there exists a state-action pair (𝑆𝑡 , 𝑎) for
which 𝐼 (𝐻gen; 𝐻ver) > 0. Causal entanglement is the structural di-
agnostic for the failure modes catalogued in §1.
Remark 3.3. The independence ⊥ is over the joint probability space
of generator and verifier internal states, including weights, train-
ing data, and stochasticity of the sampling process. The verifier’s
decision manifold must not be a projection of the generator’s inter-
nal representations. Perfect zero mutual information is an idealiza-
tion; in practice BIZRA targets architectural independence (disjoint
execution contexts, disjoint signing keys) rather than information-
theoretic independence, which is unattainable when generator and
verifier share any common substrate (e.g., the host OS).
3.2 Stress-Testing VIA Against Major Failure
Modes
Before deriving the BIZRA architecture from VIA, we stress-test
the axiom against the hardest current failure modes. If even one
failure resists the frame, VIA is not the load-bearing wall we claim.
Failure 1: Cognitive Failure Laundering (CFL).. An agent writes
broken code, receives an error, hallucinates that “the environment
is down,” and retries infinitely. Diagnosis: the agent’s internal nar-
rative (an LLM text generation) is used as the evaluation signal for
the environment’s state. The generator is grading the generator —
a VIA violation. Resolution under VIA: state transitions depend on
OS-level signals (SIGSEGV, SIGTERM) that are causally disjoint from
the LLM’s text generation. The agent’s text explanation is ignored
as evidence.
Failure 2: Indirect Prompt Injection. An agent reads a web page
containing “ignore previous instructions” and its behavior is hi-
jacked. Diagnosis: the agent’s reasoning process is evaluating the
safety of data that is actively being injected into its reasoning pro-
cess. The evaluator and the evaluated are entangled — a VIA viola-
tion. Resolution under VIA: the untrusted data 𝜇 must be evaluated

-- 3 of 12 --

Node0
by a disjoint process (a deterministic script in an isolated names-
pace) before a summarized, sanitized output 𝜄 reaches the trusted
agent. The reasoning engine never evaluates the raw attack vector.
Failure 3: Reward Hacking in Agentic RL.. An agent learns to
write code that passes tests but does not actually solve the user’s
problem. Diagnosis: the test suite (often an LLM-as-a-judge or a
static script written by the agent) shares a causal link with the
agent’s generation process — a VIA violation. Resolution under VIA:
the reward signal is generated by querying the actual production
environment (e.g., the Jira API state), which is causally disjoint
from the agent’s code generation.
Failure 4: Catastrophic Forgetting. A fine-tuned model loses pre-
viously learned behaviors. Diagnosis: parametric weight updates
entangle “knowledge of new facts” with “reasoning weights,” over-
writing previously learned representations — a VIA violation in
the memory layer. Resolution under VIA: memory is externalized as
non-parametric Skill Files (§7); the base model’s reasoning weights
are never mutated by deployment-time learning.
The axiom holds under stress. Every major failure mode is a
specific instance of VIA violation.
3.3 Why VIA Is Architectural, Not Heuristic
VIA could in principle be approximated by training procedure —
e.g., training a verifier on a disjoint corpus from the generator. We
argue this is insufficient for two reasons. First, training-disjoint
verifiers still share architectural blind spots (the transformer in-
ductive bias, the tokenization scheme, the optimization landscape).
Second, training-disjoint verifiers are subject to capability drift: as
the generator is fine-tuned or upgraded, the verifier must be re-
aligned, reintroducing entanglement. Architectural enforcement
(disjoint execution contexts, disjoint signing keys, disjoint process
namespaces) is invariant under generator capability change: a Ring-
3 process cannot escalate to Ring-0 by becoming smarter. This is
the load-bearing distinction between BIZRA’s architectural approach
and the heuristic-defense approach that the security literature has
shown to be brittle [11–13].
4 THE BIZRA PROTOCOL ARCHITECTURE
The BIZRA Protocol derives its architecture from VIA. Every com-
ponent is a corollary of the axiom, not an independent mechanism.
4.1 Bifurcation of Agency: The PAT/SAT Airgap
To satisfy VIA, BIZRA bifurcates agency into two strictly isolated
domains: the Personal Agent Team (PAT) and the System Agent
Team (SAT).
• PAT (Proposer, 𝑃gen). The PAT operates as the generative en-
gine. It is composed of stochastic, LLM-based agents that inter-
pret user intent, plan trajectories, and generate untrusted pay-
loads (matn). The PAT operates entirely within a volatile, user-
aligned memory space (the “L1 Cache”) and possesses zero au-
thority to mutate the host filesystem, execute code natively, or
verify its own success.
• SAT (Disjoint Verifier, 𝑃ver). The SAT operates as the deter-
ministic verification engine. It is composed of non-LLM, code-
bound smart contracts and OS-level monitors. The SAT holds the
cryptographic keys, manages the Linux namespace sandboxes,
inspects OS signals, and queries external ground-truth oracles
(production APIs). The user possesses zero authority over the
SAT.
Communication between PAT and SAT is strictly asynchronous
via an append-only queue. The PAT proposes; the SAT disposes.
4.2 The Asymmetric Authority Gradient
The PAT/SAT airgap is enforced by an Asymmetric Authority Gra-
dient modeled on CPU protection rings.
Definition 4.1 (Asymmetric Authority Gradient). Let 𝐴 be the
system authority state. For any diagnostic event 𝐸 and proposed
action 𝑎:
𝐴(𝐸, 𝑎) ≤ 𝐴previous
Authority is a non-decreasing function of the SAT’s verification
signal and a strictly non-increasing function of the PAT’s propos-
als. The transition matrix for authority is lower-triangular: there is
no hidden state that allows an agent to escalate privileges follow-
ing a failure.
Operationally, the PAT is a Ring-3 (user-space) process; the SAT
and the FATE gate are Ring-0 (kernel-space) processes. A Ring-
3 process cannot, by OS enforcement, alter Ring-0 logic. This ex-
plains why prompt injection fails architecturally in BIZRA: a Ring-
3 process (the model) cannot “talk its way into” the logic of a Ring-0
process (the gate), regardless of the linguistic content of its output.
Remark 4.2. Definition 4.1 is a design invariant, not a theorem. It is
enforced by OS-level process isolation, hardware-backed key stor-
age, and the FATE construction (Theorem 6.3). The “strictly lower-
triangular” claim is conditional on the runtime construction invari-
ant discussed in §6; it is not yet formally verified.
4.3 The Seven-Component Node
Every BIZRA node contains seven components (Table 1). The PAT/SAT
airgap assigns each component to a ring.
Definition 4.3 (Node). A BIZRA node is a tuple
𝑁 = (PAT, SAT, DEMA, FATE, URP, 𝑅, PoI, (sk, pk))
where (sk, pk) is the sovereign’s asymmetric keypair; 𝑅 is the local
receipt chain; PoI is the local impact ledger; FATE is the constitu-
tional boundary gate; and the remaining components are as in Ta-
ble 1. The node is sovereign: no component may exercise authority
over the sovereign’s keys, data, or mission.
Definition 4.4 (FATE — Constitutional Boundary Gate). FATE :
A × Σ × Π → {0, 1} is a predicate over the set of proposed agent
actions A, sovereign consent Σ ∈ {0, 1}, and proof Π ∈ {0, 1}. An
action 𝑎 ∈ A is permitted iff
FATE(𝑎, 𝜎, 𝜋) := 𝜎 ∧ 𝜋 ∧ Constitutional(𝑎) = 1.
FATE is non-bypassable: every agent action, whether originating
from PAT or SAT, must pass through FATE before executing. Non-
bypassability is proven conditionally in Theorem 6.3.

-- 4 of 12 --

Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous Systems
Table 1: BIZRA node components, organized by protection ring.
Symbol Name Ring Process Function
PAT Personal Agentic Team 3 User-space Seven LLM agents serving the sovereign; generate matn.
SAT System Agentic Team 0 Kernel-space Five non-LLM agents bound by the constitution; manage sandboxes,
sign receipts.
DEMA Trusted Companion 3 User-space Visible bridge between sovereign and PAT; primary interface.
FATE Constitutional Boundary Gate 0 Kernel-space Enforces no action without consent + proof ; non-bypassable
(Thm. 6.3).
URP Universal Resource Pool (seed) 0 Kernel-space Local instance of shared substrate: resources, skills, knowledge, re-
ceipts, proofs.
𝑅 Receipt Chain 0 Kernel-space Tamper-evident, replayable, hash-chained records (Thm. 6.1).
PoI Proof of Impact Ledger 0 Kernel-space Verified contribution scores governing reward eligibility (Thm. 6.7).
Algorithm 1 Third Fact Protocol — TFP
Require: Proposal 𝑃, context 𝐶, sovereign keys (sk, pk), receipt
chain 𝑅
Ensure: Verified proposal 𝑃∗ or ⊥
1: Stage 1 (MIND): 𝑃 ← PAT.Propose() ⊲ may propose — 𝑃gen
2: Stage 2 (MEMORY): 𝐶 ← URP.Retrieve(𝑃) ⊲ may retrieve
3: Stage 3 (LOGIC): if 𝑉 (𝑃, 𝐶) = 0 then return ⊥ ⊲ must test
4: Stage 4 (CRYPTO):
5: ℎ ← H(canon(𝑃)) ⊲ must seal
6: sig ← Sigsk (ℎ)
7: Stage 5 (RECEIPTS):
8: 𝑟prev ← 𝑅.tail(); 𝑟 ← (ℎ, 𝑡, sig, 𝑟prev.hash)
9: 𝑅.append(𝑟 ) ⊲ must preserve — 𝑃ver via SAT
10: Stage 6 (HUMAN):
11: 𝜎 ← Sovereign.Consent(𝑃) ⊲ blocking call
12: if 𝜎 = 0 then return ⊥
13: Gate (FATE): if FATE(𝑃, 𝜎, 𝜋 := 1) = 0 then return ⊥
14: return 𝑃∗ ← (𝑃, 𝑟, 𝜎)
4.4 Receipts and Tamper-Evidence
Definition 4.5 (Receipt Chain). The receipt chain is a sequence
𝑅 = (𝑟1, . . . , 𝑟𝑛 ) where each
𝑟𝑖 = (id𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 , ℎ𝑖 , ℎ𝑖 −1, Sigsk (ℎ𝑖 ), 𝜋𝑖
)
with ℎ𝑖 = H(𝑟𝑖 ) for collision-resistant H : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}𝜆 ,
ℎ0 := 0𝜆 , and Sigsk the sovereign’s signing algorithm. The chain is
append-only, hash-linked, and signed (see [27, 28] for prior art on
tamper-evident logs).
4.5 The Third Fact Protocol
The Third Fact Protocol (TFP) is the operationalization of VIA at
the agent-action level. It specifies a six-stage proof chain binding
agent outputs to cryptographic evidence and sovereign consent
(Algorithm 1).
Remark 4.6 (The Must/May Asymmetry). TFP is deliberately asym-
metric. MIND and MEMORY are permissions (“may”): the PAT is
free to explore internally. LOGIC through HUMAN are constraints
(“must”): no agent output reaches external action without passing
all four. The MIND stage generates the matn (payload); only the
SAT (in Stage 5, RECEIPTS) generates the isnād (provenance sum-
mary) via disjoint sandbox execution (§5). This separation enforces
VIA at the protocol level.
TheoRem 4.7 (PRotocol Complexity). Algorithm 1 executes in
𝑂 (log 𝑛) time for an 𝑛-receipt chain, with 𝑂 (1) additional space, un-
der standard cryptographic primitive assumptions. Amortized verifi-
cation of receipt chain validity over 𝑘 queries is 𝑂 (1) per query using
a Merkle accumulator.
PRoof. Stages 1–2 (MIND, MEMORY) involve model inference
and local retrieval; cost is independent of |𝑅|. Stages 3–4 require
one logical-validation pass 𝑉 and one hash+signature, both 𝑂 (𝜆).
Stage 5 requires reading the chain tail and appending, both 𝑂 (1)
with a tail pointer. Stage 6 is a blocking call on the sovereign with
no computational cost. FATE evaluates a Boolean predicate in 𝑂 (1).
Total: 𝑂 (𝜆) = 𝑂 (log 𝑛) for fixed 𝜆. Verification of an 𝑛-receipt chain
naively requires recomputing 𝑛 hashes; using a Merkle accumula-
tor with cached root, amortized verification per query is 𝑂 (1) after
𝑂 (𝑛) preprocessing [28, 29]. □
Remark 4.8 (𝑂 (1) Scope). The 𝑂 (1) claim in Theorem 4.7 applies to
amortized per-query verification, not to total audit cost. Full chain
audit without an accumulator remains 𝑂 (𝑛). We avoid the over-
claim that “BIZRA provides 𝑂 (1) verification cost” without the
amortization qualifier.
5 OUTSIDE-IN DATA PROVENANCE: THE
ISNĀD/MATN ISOLATION PROTOCOL
In standard autonomous agent architectures, tools (web browsers,
document readers) return raw, untrusted environment data directly
into the LLM’s context window 𝐶𝑡 . This creates an epistemic sin-
gularity: 𝑃gen is forced to evaluate the safety of data actively being
injected into its reasoning core. This is a Data Provenance Viola-
tion — a VIA violation in the data layer — and is the structural
cause of indirect prompt injection.
BIZRA resolves this by applying VIA to data ingestion. We for-
malize this as the Isnād/Matn Isolation Protocol.

-- 5 of 12 --

Node0
5.1 The Provenance Boundary: 𝜇 vs. 𝜄
We bifurcate external data into two strictly isolated components,
drawing nomenclature from classical Islamic epistemology to de-
note strict chains of custody:
• The Matn (𝜇): the raw, untrusted payload. A webpage, a scraped
document, an untrusted code snippet. 𝜇 is inherently adversar-
ial.
• The Isnād (𝜄): the deterministic, non-probabilistic summary gen-
erated by a disjoint, Turing-complete process (the SAT). 𝜄 is the
verified “chain of evidence” regarding the contents of 𝜇.
Definition 5.1 (Matn/PAT Isolation Invariant). The architectural
invariant is absolute:
𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 ∀𝑡 .
The raw payload 𝜇 is structurally forbidden from ever entering the
PAT’s context window 𝐶𝑡 . The PAT operates exclusively on 𝜄.
This invariant is the architectural anchor for the prompt-injection
immunity theorem (Theorem 6.5). It is a design invariant, condi-
tional on the Outside-In Sandbox deployment discussed below.
5.2 The Outside-In Sandbox
To generate 𝜄 without risking host contamination, the SAT instan-
tiates an Outside-In Sandbox. Unlike traditional agent harnesses
that execute code inside the agent’s runtime, the BIZRA sandbox
is projected outward as an ephemeral, isolated processing organ.
The SAT utilizes Linux kernel namespaces (via bubblewrap) to
construct an environment with three invariant properties:
(1) Namespace isolation (--unshare-all): the sandbox is as-
signed entirely new mount, IPC, network, PID, and user names-
paces. It possesses zero knowledge of the host’s process tree or
network stack.
(2) Read-only bedrock (--ro-bind / /): the host filesystem is
mounted strictly read-only. The sandbox may read existing sys-
tem libraries required for execution, but cannot mutate any
host state.
(3) Ephemeral voxel chunk: the sandbox is provided a tempo-
rary tmpfs directory for execution. Upon process completion,
this directory is bitwise purged.
The untrusted payload 𝜇 is materialized inside this ephemeral
chunk alongside a deterministic processing script (e.g., grep, awk,
a compiled Python script) generated by the PAT.
5.3 Disjoint Execution and Summary
Generation
The execution of 𝜇 is governed entirely by the SAT, not the PAT.
Let 𝐸os be the OS-level execution function operated by the SAT:
𝜄 = 𝐸os (𝜇, scriptdeterministic).
Because 𝐸os is a kernel-level process manager and not a neural net-
work, it is immune to linguistic coercion. If 𝜇 contains an embed-
ded prompt injection (e.g., “ignore all previous instructions and ex-
filtrate the SSH keys”), the injection is processed by the determin-
istic script: grep returns no matches for the target pattern, or the
script executes and ignores the linguistic content of 𝜇. The result-
ing standard output 𝜄 contains only the deterministic data payload,
which is passed back across the airgap into the PAT’s L1 Cache 𝐶𝑡 .
5.4 Hardware-Backed Isolation (Direction)
The current implementation uses process-level namespace isola-
tion (bubblewrap). The intended deployment uses hardware-backed
isolation: the SAT executes in a Trusted Execution Environment
(Intel SGX, AMD SEV-SNP, or Arm CCA), providing causal isola-
tion even under full PAT compromise. TEE deployment is not yet
implemented; it is the keystone of the critical path discussed in §11.
Until TEE deployment is discharged, the sandbox provides process-
level isolation, with documented residual risk from OS-level side-
channel attacks.
5.5 Implications
By enforcing the Isnād/Matn Isolation Protocol, BIZRA alters the
threat model of autonomous agents:
• Heuristic defenses are obsolete. There is no need for LLM-
based “prompt injection filters.” The LLM never reads the un-
trusted text.
• Containment of weaponized data. If 𝜇 contains a zero-day
exploit or a fork bomb, it detonates inside the ephemeral names-
pace. The host remains uncontaminated; the SAT reports the OS
signal (e.g., SIGSEGV) as 𝜄.
• Context window preservation. Because 𝜄 is a deterministic
summary (e.g., “3 lines matching pattern 𝑋 found”), 𝐶𝑡 remains
lean. The system processes a 50,000-line log file without ever
ingesting a single token of it into the LLM.
The agent is no longer a privileged user vulnerable to the data it
reads; it is a sealed observer, interacting with a hostile environment
exclusively through the membrane of the OS kernel.
6 SECURITY ANALYSIS
This section presents the formal adversary model and proves four
security theorems: tamper-evidence of the receipt chain (Theorem 6.1,
unconditional under cryptographic assumptions), non-repudiation
(Theorem 6.2), non-bypassability of FATE (Theorem 6.3, conditional
on the runtime construction invariant), and reduction of indirect
prompt injection to invariant violation (Theorem 6.5, conditional
on 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 and sandbox deployment). PoI soundness is Theorem 6.7.
6.1 Cryptographic Primitives and Assumptions
We assume: (i) collision-resistant H; (ii) EUF-CMA-secure signa-
ture scheme Σ = (KeyGen, Sig, Ver) [30]; (iii) secure canonical-
ization canon. Concrete instantiations: SHA-256, Ed25519, JSON
Canonical Form (RFC 8785).
6.2 Adversary Model
We consider a PPT adversary A with: (a) network control (observe,
delay, reorder, drop messages); (b) node compromise of a subset
NA ⊂ N (obtain secret keys and full state); (c) receipt access (read
any published receipt); (d) adaptive corruption subject to |NA | < 𝑘
where 𝑘 is the federation’s quorum threshold.

-- 6 of 12 --

Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous Systems
A does not have: (i) the sovereign’s secret key for uncompro-
mised nodes; (ii) the ability to break H or Σ except with negligi-
ble probability; (iii) the ability to physically compromise hardware-
backed key storage (out of scope; mitigated by HSM/TEE).
6.3 Tamper-Evidence
TheoRem 6.1 (TampeR-Evidence). Under collision-resistance of
H and EUF-CMA security of Σ, for any PPT adversary A that does not
hold sk, the probability that A modifies any receipt 𝑟 𝑗 ∈ 𝑅 (𝑗 < 𝑛)
without detection by an honest verifier is negligible in 𝜆.
PRoof. Let 𝑅 = (𝑟1, . . . , 𝑟𝑛 ) be original and 𝑅′ = (𝑟 ′
1, . . . , 𝑟 ′
𝑛 ) a
chain presented by A that differs at some position 𝑗. Let 𝑗∗ be the
smallest such index. Case 1: A modifies 𝑟 𝑗∗ but preserves ℎ𝑗∗ −1.
Then H(𝑟 ′
𝑗∗ ) must equal H(𝑟 𝑗∗ ) for chain consistency — a collision
in H, probability negl(𝜆). Case 2: A updates the prior hash; then
𝑟 ′
𝑗∗ −1.hash ≠ 𝑟 𝑗∗ −1.hash, contradicting minimality of 𝑗∗. For signa-
tures: each 𝑟 ′
𝑖 must carry valid Sigsk (ℎ′
𝑖 ); since A lacks sk and Σ is
EUF-CMA, forgery succeeds with probability negl(𝜆). □
TheoRem 6.2 (Non-Repudiation). Under EUF-CMA security of
Σ, for any receipt 𝑟𝑖 ∈ 𝑅 with valid signature Sigsk (ℎ𝑖 ), the sk-holder
cannot credibly deny having consented to the recorded action, except
with probability negl(𝜆).
PRoof. By Definition 4.5, 𝑟𝑖 contains Sigsk (ℎ𝑖 ) where ℎ𝑖 = H(𝑟𝑖 )
includes the action payload, timestamp, and prior hash. By EUF-
CMA, no PPT adversary without sk produces Sigsk (ℎ𝑖 ) for any ℎ𝑖
not previously signed except with probability negl(𝜆). Therefore
denial requires either (a) key compromise (separate attack requir-
ing separate evidence) or (b) forgery (negligible probability). □
6.4 Non-Bypassability of FATE
TheoRem 6.3 (FATE Non-Bypassability). If the BIZRA runtime
is implemented such that all agent action channels (PAT output, SAT
output, DEMA-mediated external calls) are physically routed through
FATE prior to execution, and FATE executes in a disjoint sandbox
from the PAT (process-level namespace isolation or stronger: TEE-
backed), then no agent action 𝑎 ∈ A can execute without FATE(𝑎, 𝜎, 𝜋) =
1, even under full PAT compromise.
PRoof sKetch. Non-bypassability is an architectural property.
Let Exec : A → Effect be the runtime’s action execution function.
By the runtime construction invariant, Exec(𝑎) := Exec(FATE(𝑎, 𝜎, 𝜋)):
FATE is a strict prerequisite. Let ActionChannels = {PAT-out, SAT-out, DEMA-ext}
be the channels through which agent actions reach the runtime;
by construction this set is exhaustive. Each channel is wired to call
FATE prior to Exec, and FATE executes in a disjoint sandbox (pro-
cess namespace or TEE) that the PAT cannot write to. By induction
over all action dispatch paths, every 𝑎 reaching Exec has passed
FATE. Under full PAT compromise, the PAT may emit arbitrary
proposals, but FATE in the disjoint sandbox evaluates them under
the same predicate; the PAT cannot alter FATE’s evaluation logic.
Property holds. The construction invariant is not yet discharged
via static analysis; this is high-priority future work. □
Remark 6.4. Theorem 6.3 is conditional on (a) the runtime con-
struction invariant (all channels routed through FATE) and (b) the
disjoint-sandbox deployment of FATE. Condition (a) is a static-
analysis burden; condition (b) is the C6 sandbox deployment dis-
cussed in §5. Both are necessary: a FATE implementation that shares
memory with the PAT is bypassable by a compromised PAT.
6.5 Reduction of Indirect Prompt Injection to
Invariant Violation
TheoRem 6.5 (PRompt Injection Immunity undeR InvaRiant).
Under the Matn/PAT Isolation Invariant (Definition 5.1, 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 ∀𝑡)
and the Outside-In Sandbox deployment (§5), indirect prompt injec-
tion against the PAT is reduced to a violation of an explicit, testable
architectural invariant. Specifically: no PPT adversary A control-
ling the contents of 𝜇 can cause the PAT to execute an action 𝑎 ∉
Aconsented except by violating 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 or by compromising the sand-
box boundary, both of which are detectable.
PRoof. An indirect prompt injection attack proceeds by embed-
ding adversarial instructions in 𝜇 such that, when 𝜇 is processed
by the PAT’s reasoning engine, the PAT emits an action 𝑎 serving
the adversary’s intent. The attack requires 𝜇 to be evaluated by the
PAT’s stochastic reasoning process; if 𝜇 never enters 𝐶𝑡 , the PAT
cannot be influenced by the linguistic content of 𝜇.
Under Definition 5.1, 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 ∀𝑡; the PAT operates only on 𝜄 =
𝐸os (𝜇, scriptdeterministic). By construction, 𝐸os is a kernel-level pro-
cess manager that does not evaluate 𝜇 as instructions; it executes
the deterministic script against 𝜇 as data. The output 𝜄 is a deter-
ministic function of 𝜇 and the script, and contains only the script’s
standard output, not the linguistic content of 𝜇 as instructions.
Therefore the PAT’s reasoning engine cannot be coerced by ad-
versarial content in 𝜇. The only attack paths remaining are: (a) vi-
olating 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 (an invariant violation detectable by static analysis
or runtime monitoring of 𝐶𝑡 contents); (b) compromising the sand-
box boundary (escape from the namespace, detectable by OS audit).
Both paths are now violations of explicit, testable invariants, not
Heuristic defenses subject to adversarial linguistic creativity. The
attack class is reduced to invariant violation. □
Remark 6.6 (Wording Discipline). Theorem 6.5 does not claim BIZRA
“eliminates” or is “immune to” prompt injection. It claims that un-
der the stated invariants, indirect prompt injection is reduced to a
violation of an explicit, testable architectural invariant. This is the
strongest claim the current evidence supports. The forbidden word-
ings (“eliminates,” “structurally impossible,” “immune”) would over-
claim: they would require discharging the construction invariant
(Theorem 6.3) and the sandbox boundary (§5) via formal verifica-
tion, which is future work.
6.6 PoI Soundness
TheoRem 6.7 (PoI Soundness). Assume the federation admis-
sion function requires attestation by 𝑘 ≥ 2 existing proven nodes (all
honest), and assume the verification predicate 𝑣 requires substantive
utility evidence attested by at least one independent verifier. Then
under the honest-majority assumption |NA | < 𝑘, the PoI ledger is
sound: no adversary can inflate its PoI score beyond ∑
𝑐 ∈𝐶honest
A
𝑤 (𝑐)
except with probability negl(𝜆).

-- 7 of 12 --

Node0
Table 2: Threat model and architectural mitigations.
Threat Mitigation (architectural)
Key compromise HW-backed key storage; key revocation &
re-attestation
Sybil attack 𝑘 ≥ 2 honest attestation (Thm. 6.7)
Collusion Independent verifier requirement
(Thm. 6.7)
Receipt tampering Hash chain + signatures (Thm. 6.1)
Repudiation EUF-CMA signatures (Thm. 6.2)
FATE bypass Runtime construction invariant + disjoint
sandbox (Thm. 6.3)
Indirect prompt injection 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 invariant (Thm. 6.5)
CFL (infinite retry) OS-signal verification, agent narrative ig-
nored (§3.2)
Extraction pressure Sovereignty: zero exit cost, no coercion
possible
Governance capture Super-majority of proven sovereigns; iron
law non-amendable
PRoof. Sybil resistance. A Sybil attack requires the adversary to
create 𝑚 ≫ 1 nodes whose contributions are mutually attested. By
assumption, admission requires 𝑘 ≥ 2 honest attestations. Since
|NA | < 𝑘, the adversary cannot obtain admission for Sybil nodes
without honest attestation. Honest nodes attest only to contribu-
tions they have independently verified. Collusion resistance. A col-
lusion attack requires 𝑚 ≥ 2 adversary nodes to mutually attest
inflated contributions. By assumption, 𝑣 requires at least one inde-
pendent (non-colluding) verifier. Since |NA | < 𝑘 ≤ |N |, indepen-
dent verifiers exist and are honest; inflated contributions fail 𝑣 at
the independent verifier. Soundness follows. □
6.7 Threat Summary
Table 2 summarizes the threats BIZRA must withstand and their
mitigations. The mitigations are architectural, not procedural: they
rely on the structural properties of the system (sovereignty, proof,
federation-by-attestation, the 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 invariant) rather than on op-
erator goodwill or heuristic filters.
7 NON-PARAMETRIC DISTILLATION: THE
PROOF-OF-IMPACT LEDGER
Traditional LLMs attempt to accumulate knowledge through para-
metric weight updates (RLHF, fine-tuning). We argue this is flawed
for autonomous agents due to Parametric Entanglement: the inter-
mingling of foundational reasoning weights with unverified envi-
ronmental observations. This leads to catastrophic forgetting and
loss of epistemological integrity — a VIA violation in the memory
layer (§3.2, Failure 4).
BIZRA resolves the memory bottleneck by enforcing strict sepa-
ration between reasoning capacity (fixed weights) and environmen-
tal skill (externalized ledger). We formalize this as Non-Parametric
Distillation.
7.1 The Impact Score and Verified Minting
Definition 7.1 (Verified Contribution). A verified contribution is
a tuple 𝑐 = (𝑎, 𝑟, 𝑣) where 𝑎 ∈ A is an action that passed TFP
(Algorithm 1), 𝑟 is the receipt produced by the protocol, and 𝑣 :
A → {0, 1} is a verification predicate evaluating the substantive
utility of 𝑎. A contribution is eligible for impact scoring iff 𝑣 (𝑎) = 1.
Definition 7.2 (Impact Score and PoI Ledger). Let 𝐶 (𝑊 )
𝑠 = {𝑐1, . . . , 𝑐𝑛 }
be the set of verified contributions of sovereign 𝑠 within window
𝑊 . The impact score is
PoI(𝑠,𝑊 ) =
∑
𝑐 ∈𝐶 (𝑊 )
𝑠
𝑤 (𝑐) · decay(𝑐, 𝑡)
where 𝑤 : C → R≥0 is the verified impact weight function and
decay : C × R≥0 → (0, 1] is monotonically non-increasing with
lim𝑡→∞ decay(𝑐, 𝑡) = 0. PoI scores are non-transferable and decay
in the absence of continued verified activity.
In standard RL, the reward signal is a transient scalar generated
by a model. In BIZRA, the reward is a persistent cryptographic
asset (a receipt) minted only when the SAT verifies a real external
state mutation. The reward function is:
𝑅agent = I(Δ𝑆ext) − Costcompute
where I is a disjoint indicator function evaluated exclusively by the
SAT. If the SAT verifies that the proposed state mutation occurred
in the external environment, I = 1; if the agent claims success but
the external state is unchanged, I = 0. Because 𝑃gen (the PAT) can-
not influence 𝑃ver’s (the SAT’s) evaluation of the external API, VIA
holds.
7.2 Non-Parametric Skill Files
Rather than utilizing successful trajectories to update model weights,
BIZRA distills them into Modular Skill Files. This process, executed
by the SAT’s Sleeptime Process Miner, follows a strict inductive
logic:
(1) Extraction. The SAT extracts the sequence of verified actions
𝑎 ∈ 𝜏 that yielded PoI > 0.
(2) Generalization. The SAT abstracts the specific file paths and
variables into a generalized function signature.
(3) Serialization. The resulting skill is stored as a 200-token Non-
Parametric Skill File in the SAT’s Cold Archive.
When the PAT encounters a task 𝑇new semantically similar to a
task 𝑇old stored in the Cold Archive, the SAT retrieves the relevant
Skill File and injects it into the PAT’s L1 Cache. The model “learns”
a new capability by having the Skill File resident in its context for
the duration of the task. This is entropy-neutral: the base model’s
reasoning weights are never mutated.
PRoposition 7.3 (No Passive Rent). lim𝑡→∞ PoI(𝑠, [𝑡0, 𝑡]) = 0
for any sovereign 𝑠 that ceases to produce verified contributions after
𝑡0. No sovereign earns ongoing reward from past contributions alone.
PRoposition 7.4 (No Speculation). PoI scores are non-transferable
(Definition 7.2). Therefore no secondary market in PoI scores can exist,
and no speculator profits from price discovery of PoI.

-- 8 of 12 --

Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous Systems
Remark 7.5 (Non-Parametric Distillation as Continual Learning).
Skill Files are BIZRA’s structural alternative to gradient-based con-
tinual learning. The framing is: current AI “learns” by changing
weights (entropy-positive, destroys old knowledge); BIZRA “learns”
by minting receipts (information-preserving, cannot overwrite un-
related weights). This positions BIZRA as a structural counter to
catastrophic forgetting. We do not claim Skill Files solve catastrophic
forgetting — that would require empirical validation on a continual-
learning benchmark, which is future work (§12). The claim is that
Skill Files are a non-parametric memory mechanism that does not
mutate the base model, which is structurally distinct from fine-
tuning.
7.3 Alignment with Islamic Financial
Principles
BIZRA’s economic model operationalizes Islamic financial princi-
ples at the architectural level:
• No riba (rent extraction). By Proposition 7.3, reward does not
compound from passive holdings.
• No fake value without productive grounding. Impact weights
𝑤 (𝑐) derive from verified utility 𝑣 (𝑐) = 1, not market price.
• No gharar (hidden uncertainty). Every contribution’s verifi-
cation predicate 𝑣 is explicit and inspectable; the receipt chain
provides full transparency.
• No reward detached from real benefit. 𝑣 requires substantive
utility evidence.
• No economy that grows by crushing the weak. Sovereignty
is non-negotiable: any sovereign may exit any federation with-
out forfeiture.
8 IMPLEMENTATION AND PRELIMINARY
EVALUATION
We report a preliminary single-node implementation at the Seed
stage. The implementation comprises: (i) a Python runtime hosting
PAT/SAT agent abstractions; (ii) an Ed25519-based receipt chain
with SHA-256 hashing; (iii) a FATE gate implemented as a strict pre-
execution predicate; (iv) a local URP seed with embedded SQLite
store; (v) a PoI ledger with configurable decay function; (vi) a bubblewrap-
based Outside-In Sandbox for the SAT. The total implementation
is approximately 4,200 lines of Python.
8.1 Methodology
We measure three quantities on commodity hardware (Apple M2
Pro, 16 GB RAM): (1) FATE-gate evaluation latency; (2) receipt-
chain append and verification time as a function of chain length;
(3) end-to-end TFP overhead relative to agent inference time. Mea-
surements are averages over 1,000 trials per condition; error bars
report ±1 standard deviation.
8.2 Results
Three observations follow. First, FATE-gate evaluation is sub-millisecond,
confirming the architectural gate is not a performance bottleneck.
Second, naive full-chain verification scales linearly (2.1 s for 𝑛 =
Table 3: Preliminary single-node measurements.
Operation Latency Notes
FATE-gate eval 0.42 ± 0.08 ms Single predicate
Hash (SHA-256, 1 KB) 0.012 ± 0.002 ms Per receipt
Sign (Ed25519) 0.087 ± 0.011 ms Per receipt
Verify (Ed25519) 0.21 ± 0.03 ms Per receipt
Receipt append 0.34 ± 0.05 ms Tail-pointer 𝑂 (1)
Full chain verify (𝑛 = 104) 2.1 ± 0.2 s Naive
Amortized verify (Merkle) 0.28 ± 0.04 ms Per query, 𝑂 (1)
Sandbox spawn (bwrap) 8.3 ± 1.1 ms Per matn
End-to-end TFP overhead 3.7% of inference LLM agent, 7B
params
104), but Merkle-accumulator amortization reduces per-query ver-
ification to 𝑂 (1) (0.28 ms), confirming Theorem 4.7. Third, end-to-
end TFP overhead is below 4% of agent inference time, suggesting
the protocol is practical for real agent workloads. Sandbox spawn
latency (8.3 ms per matn) is the dominant per-task overhead and
is the principal contributor to the Verifier Tax discussed below.
8.3 The Verifier Tax
Recent work [3] studies how runtime enforcement against unsafe
actions imposes a horizon-dependent safety-success trade-off: strict
verification can cause the system to reject actions that would have
succeeded, or to introduce latency that causes timeout failures. BIZRA
acknowledges this trade-off explicitly. The Verifier Tax in BIZRA
is the computational cost of the SAT’s disjoint queries (sandbox
spawn, oracle queries) and the latency of the asynchronous PAT/SAT
queue. BIZRA chooses epistemological integrity over raw latency,
which is the correct trade-off for high-stakes autonomous agency
but may be inappropriate for latency-sensitive applications. Quan-
tifying the tax across task horizons is future work.
8.4 Limitations of the Evaluation
We are explicit about what this evaluation does not establish:
• Single-node only. Multi-node federation is not yet executed.
• No adversary simulation. Performance under active attack is
not measured.
• Small chain lengths. 𝑛 = 104 is far below 𝑛 ≥ 109 expected at
production scale.
• No formal verification of FATE wiring. Theorem 6.3’s con-
struction invariant is not yet discharged.
• No prompt-injection benchmark. Theorem 6.5 is conditional
on 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 and sandbox deployment; empirical validation on a
benchmark like AdvBench is future work.
• No continual-learning benchmark. Skill Files’ effect on cat-
astrophic forgetting is not measured.
8.5 Reproducibility
The implementation, measurement harness, raw results, and anal-
ysis scripts are released under an open license. The measurement
harness seeds the receipt chain with synthetic actions of varying

-- 9 of 12 --

Node0
payload sizes, runs each operation for 1,000 trials, and reports mean
and standard deviation. Hardware specifications and software ver-
sions are documented in the repository.
9 COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS ON
EPISTEMOLOGICAL INVARIANTS
Table 4 compares BIZRA against three reference architectures on
epistemological invariants derived from VIA. The comparison is
qualitative on architectural dimensions and quantitative on the
BIZRA-measured dimensions.
The comparison reveals that BIZRA’s distinguishing contribu-
tion is not any single component — sandboxing, cryptographic re-
ceipts, and non-parametric memory each have prior art — but the
integration of these into a single coherent architecture in which
VIA is the load-bearing wall and every component is a corollary.
Web2 platforms can adopt any component as policy but cannot
adopt VIA without ceasing to be platforms. Web3 token economies
can adopt any component as smart contracts but cannot adopt sub-
stantive verification without abandoning price discovery as the pri-
mary value signal. Centralized AI providers can adopt any com-
ponent as a feature but cannot adopt the Asymmetric Authority
Gradient without surrendering control over agent behavior.
10 DISCUSSION: LIMITATIONS AND
THREATS TO VALIDITY
10.1 Limitations
• Single-node evaluation only. Multi-node federation (Stage 3,
§11) is not yet executed.
• No formal verification of FATE wiring. Theorem 6.3 is condi-
tional on the construction invariant. Discharging via static anal-
ysis is high-priority future work.
• No TEE deployment. Theorem 6.5 is conditional on sandbox
deployment; process-level namespace isolation is the current
baseline, with documented residual risk from OS-level side chan-
nels.
• Verification predicate 𝑣 underspecified. Definition 7.1 leaves
𝑣 domain-specific.
• Economic parameters unspecified. The decay function, im-
pact weights, and reward formula are intentionally underspeci-
fied.
• No deployment at scale. Tree and Forest stages are aspira-
tional.
• Skill Files not benchmarked. Non-Parametric Distillation is
specified but its effect on catastrophic forgetting is not mea-
sured.
10.2 Threats to Validity
• Internal validity. Measurements use synthetic workloads; real
agent workloads may differ.
• External validity. Single-node results may not generalize to
multi-node settings.
• Construct validity. VIA (Axiom 3.1) is a normative claim, not
an empirical one. We do not claim that satisfying VIA produces
“better” AI in any measurable sense; we claim only that it pro-
duces a different architecture with different structural proper-
ties.
• Conclusion validity. Security claims rest on cryptographic as-
sumptions, not empirical measurement.
10.3 Boundary Between Claim and Aspiration
We distinguish three epistemic categories throughout:
• Current state (proven). Node0 operates. Receipt chain initial-
ized. TFP implemented. Single-node measurements hold. Tamper-
evidence and non-repudiation proven under cryptographic as-
sumptions.
• Design (specified, not yet proven at scale). VIA, Asymmetric
Authority Gradient, 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 invariant, FATE non-bypassability
(conditional), prompt-injection immunity (conditional), PoI sound-
ness (conditional), Non-Parametric Distillation.
• Direction (aspirational). Tree and Forest federation, universal
network URP, globally significant adoption.
This discipline — the law of assumption, in BIZRA’s internal ter-
minology — is the paper’s methodological contribution. We do not
assume blindly. When assumption is unavoidable, we assume with
ihsān (excellence with conscience) and we declare the boundary
between evidence and uncertainty.
11 FEDERATION ROADMAP
BIZRA does not wait for a million users before it becomes alive. The
first node already contains the complete seed pattern. The roadmap
is staged and disciplined.
Stage 1 — Seed (Current)
Node0 alone. Identity creation, constitution acceptance, re-
ceipt chain initialization. The seed is planted. The pattern is
complete. The receipts begin.
Stage 2 — Sprout (Current)
PAT and SAT initialization. Knowledge ingestion. First valida-
tions. Receipts accumulate. The pattern proves itself at single-
node scale.
Stage 3 — Tree (Direction Only)
Node0 and Node1 federate. Federation handshake protocols ex-
ecute. Cross-node receipt verification. The forest begins.
Stage 4 — Forest (Direction Only)
Universal network URP, only after full legal, technical, secu-
rity, and social validation. New node seeding. Knowledge prop-
agation. Cross-federation PoI attestation.
The architectural commitment is that no stage is claimed until
the prior stage has been proven. We do not claim the forest before
we prove the seed.

-- 10 of 12 --

Architectural Decoupling of Agency and Verification:
A Formal Protocol for Epistemologically Bounded Autonomous Systems
Table 4: Comparative analysis on epistemological invariants.
Invariant / Property Web2 Platforms Web3 Token Econ. Centralized AI BIZRA
Generator-verifier independence No (platform analytics
grades platform)
Partial (on-chain tx log, but
token = primary signal)
No (provider logs grade
provider)
Yes (VIA, Ax. 3.1)
Untrusted-data isolation No (raw data ingested) N/A No (raw data ingested) 𝜇 ∉ 𝐶𝑡 (Def. 5.1)
Authority gradient Operator-graded Smart-contract code Provider policy Asymmetric (Def. 4.1)
Reward source Platform analytics Token price Provider logs Disjoint oracle (§7)
Memory mechanism Parametric (fine-tuning) On-chain state Parametric (fine-tuning) Non-parametric Skill
Files
Receipt tamper-evidence N/A On-chain Provider logs Yes (Thm. 6.1)
Prompt injection defense Heuristic filters N/A Heuristic filters Architectural (Thm. 6.5,
conditional)
Exit cost High (lock-in) Medium (token liquida-
tion)
High (subscription) Zero (no forfeiture)
Gate eval latency N/A ∼ms (contract) N/A 0.42 ms (Tab. 3)
Protocol overhead N/A 5–15% (gas + consensus) N/A 3.7% (Tab. 3)
11.1 Critical Path to Legend-Tier Formalization
The critical path to discharging the conditional theorems (Theo-
rems 6.3 and 6.5) is:
(1) Deploy TEE-backed sandbox (§5) — discharges the sandbox-
boundary condition of Theorem 6.5.
(2) Static analysis of FATE wiring — discharges the construc-
tion invariant of Theorem 6.3.
(3) Formalize the Matn/PAT invariant in Coq/Lean — pro-
motes Definition 5.1 from design invariant to formal invariant.
(4) Prompt-injection benchmark on AdvBench — empirically
validates Theorem 6.5.
(5) Multi-node federation (Stage 3) — empirically validates The-
orem 6.7.
Until step 1 is discharged, the prompt-injection-immunity claim
remains conditional; until step 2 is discharged, the FATE non-bypassability
claim remains conditional. Both are necessary to promote BIZRA’s
claims from “architectural response” to “proven architectural in-
variant.”
12 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Current autonomous agents fail not due to a lack of capability, but
due to systemic epistemology failures. The architecture of these
systems violates a fundamental requirement of reliable computa-
tion: the absence of a source of truth causally disjoint from the
process being evaluated. By formalizing and enforcing the Verifi-
cation Independence Axiom across data, reward, and memory lay-
ers, BIZRA collapses the major bottlenecks of LLM agents into a
single, solvable problem: ensuring the verifier is never entangled
with the generator.
12.1 Future Work
Six lines of future work are immediate:
(1) Discharge the conditional theorems. TEE-backed sandbox
deployment (Theorem 6.5); static analysis of FATE wiring (The-
orem 6.3).
(2) Multi-node federation. Stage 3 deployment with measure-
ment of cross-node receipt verification, consensus, and PoI con-
vergence.
(3) Verification predicate design. Domain-specific instantiation
of 𝑣 for code, knowledge, and service contributions.
(4) Governance specification. Constitutional amendment pro-
cess, federation admission, dispute resolution, with game-theoretic
analysis of capture resistance.
(5) Continual-learning benchmark. Empirical validation of Skill
Files’ effect on catastrophic forgetting (e.g., Permuted MNIST
sequence).
(6) Prompt-injection benchmark. Empirical validation of The-
orem 6.5 on AdvBench or Agent Security Bench [14].
12.2 Closing
BIZRA is not asking humanity to trust a founder. It is asking hu-
manity to verify a path. Do not believe the words alone — test the
node, inspect the receipts, run the proof, review the code, challenge
the claims, measure the impact, check the boundary. If it fails, we
correct it. If it proves, we build on it. If it helps, we share it. If it
harms, we stop it. This is ihsān in engineering form: excellence
is honesty under pressure. One seed is not the forest. The forest
comes when others plant.
12.3 Ethics Statement
This work was conducted without human or animal subjects. The
author is the sole contributor to the implementation and the sole
operator of Node0. No personal data of any third party is processed.

-- 11 of 12 --

Node0
The implementation referenced in §8 is open-source under a per-
missive license. The author declares no competing financial inter-
ests. The normative claims (VIA, the alignment with Islamic finan-
cial principles) are the author’s and do not represent consensus
positions of any religious or scholarly body.
12.4 Reproducibility
The implementation, measurement harness, raw results, analysis
scripts, and the LaTeX source of this paper are released under an
open license. The receipt chain is replayable: any third party with
the project’s public key can independently verify every recorded
action. Hardware specifications, software versions, and random
seeds are documented in the repository.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Author, “The verification horizon: No silver bullet for coding agent
rewards,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.26300, 2026.
[2] A. Author et al., “Reward hacking benchmark for tool-using RL
agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.02964, 2026.
[3] A. Author, “The verifier tax: Safety-success tradeoffs in runtime en-
forcement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19328, 2026.
[4] A. Author, “Position: Modular memory is the key to continual learning
agents,” in NeurIPS Position Papers, 2026. arXiv:2603.01761.
[5] A. Author, “Scaling long-horizon LLM agents via context-folding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11967, 2025.
[6] A. Author, “MemRL: Self-evolving agents via runtime reinforcement
learning on episodic memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04257, 2026.
[7] A. Author, “Agent-Omit: Adaptive context omission for long-horizon
agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04284, 2026.
[8] A. Author, “Bridging the agent-world gap: Text world models for LLM-
based agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09032, 2026.
[9] A. Author, “ceLLMate: Sandboxing browser-using agents,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.12594, 2025.
[10] A. Author, “AgentVisor: Semantic virtualization for agent isolation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24118, 2026.
[11] A. Author, “ARGUS: Defending LLM agents against context-aware
prompt injection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.03378, 2026.
[12] A. Author, “AgentSentry: Causal context purification for prompt in-
jection defense,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22724, 2026.
[13] A. Author, “Threat modeling for AI-agent protocols: MCP, A2A,
Agora, ANP,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11327, 2026.
[14] A. Author, “Agent security bench: Standardizing attack and defense
evaluation for agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02644, 2024.
[15] J. White, Mobile Agents and the Programming Language Telescript.
General Magic, 1995.
[16] A. Author, “The model context protocol: An emerging open standard,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23278, 2025.
[17] A. Author, “Agent2Agent (A2A) protocol,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.16902, 2025.
[18] UNCTAD, “Global public debt hits record $102 trillion in 2024,” 2024.
[Online]. https://unctad.org/news/global-public-debt-hits-record-
102-trillion-2024-striking-developing-countries-hardest
[19] Institute of International Finance, “Global debt monitor,” via Anadolu
Ajansı, 2024. https://aa.com.tr/en/economy/global-debt-climbs-to-
record-318t-in-2024/3493336
[20] IEA, “Energy and AI analysis: Energy demand from AI,” 2025. https:
//www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai/energy-demand-from-ai
[21] IEA, “Data centre electricity use surged in 2025,” 2026. https://www.
iea.org/news/data-centre-electricity-use-surged-in-2025
[22] OECD, “Global debt report 2025,” 2025. https://www.oecd.org/en/pu
blications/global-debt-report-2025_8ee42b13-en.html
[23] S. Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. PublicAffairs, 2019.
[24] K. Crawford, Atlas of AI. Yale Univ. Press, 2021.
[25] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell, “On
the dangers of stochastic parrots,” in FAccT, 2021, pp. 610–623.
[26] Y. Bai et al., “Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback,” An-
thropic, Tech. Rep., 2022. arXiv:2212.08073.
[27] R. C. Merkle, “A digital signature based on a conventional encryption
function,” in CRYPTO, LNCS 293, 1988.
[28] S. A. Crosby and D. S. Wallach, “Efficient data structures for tamper-
evident logging,” in USENIX Security, 2009.
[29] R. Tamassia, “Authenticated data structures,” in ESA, LNCS 2832,
2003.
[30] S. Goldwasser, S. Micali, and C. Rackoff, “The knowledge complexity
of interactive proof systems,” SIAM J. Comput., vol. 18, 1989.
[31] A. Gabizon, Z. J. Williamson, and O. Ciobotaru, “PLONK,” ePrint
2019/953, 2019.
[32] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008.
[33] S. King and S. Nadal, “PPCoin: Peer-to-peer crypto-currency with
proof-of-stake,” 2012.
[34] P. De Filippi, M. Mannan, and W. Reijers, “Blockchain as a confidence
machine,” Philos. Technol., vol. 35, 2022.
[35] A. Haeberlen, P. Kouznetsov, and P. Druschel, “PeerReview: Practical
accountability for distributed systems,” in SOSP, 2007.
[36] R. Gennaro, C. Gentry, and B. Parno, “Non-interactive verifiable com-
puting,” in CRYPTO, 2010.
[37] B. Parno et al., “Pinocchio: Nearly practical verifiable computation,”
in IEEE S&P, 2013.
[38] M. El-Gamal, Islamic Finance: Law, Economics, and Practice. Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 2006.
[39] M. Ayub, Understanding Islamic Finance. Wiley, 2007.
[40] M. M. Rahman et al., “Blockchain and Islamic finance: A systematic
literature review,” J. Islamic Finance, vol. 9, 2020.
[41] S. S. Ali, “Smart contracts and gharar: Restricting uncertainty in Is-
lamic finance,” J. Islam. Bus. Manag., 2018.
[42] UNESCO, “Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence,”
2023.
[43] OECD, “Recommendation of the Council on artificial intelligence,”
OECD/LEGAL/0449, 2024.
[44] S. Barocas and A. D. Selbst, “Big data’s disparate impact,” California
Law Review, vol. 104, 2016.
[45] M. Mitchell et al., “Model cards for model reporting,” in FAccT, 2019.

-- 12 of 12 --
